# MyHabits
#### Video Demo: <URL HERE>
#### Description:

This project is called "MyHabits", a habit tracker that incorporates neuroscience introduced by Andrew Huberman regarding habit formation, as well as the famous book "Atomic Habits". In one of the Andrew Huberman podcasts, he introduced a protocol of a "21-day habit forming challenge", where a person selects six habits that he/she want to form, associates a time phase (morning, afternoon, or evening) rather than a specific time to make the habit more flexible and context-independent. Atomic Habits praises the idea of a habit tracker, as it raises awareness of one's habits. As Carl Jung once said, "Until you make the unconscious conscious, it will direct your life and you will call it fate." I aim to create a web application that enables people to systematically track their habits, helping them form good habits and improve themselves.

The tech stack for this project is SQLite, Flask, Python, HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. Regarding the SQLite database, I created two tables: users and habits. The "users" table has a primary key id, username, hash (of their password), and challenge_start_date. All elements besides challenge_start_date will be set in the register page. The other table, "habits," has id, user_id (which is a foreign key that references the id in the users table), name (of the habit), phase (morning, afternoon, or evening), completed_days, and last_completed. 

I've used the code I wrote for the finance problem set to set up the "Login" and "Register" pages. All pages except these two are "Login-Required". In the register page, it will insert the username and password (after hashing it) into the users table. The login page will check the username and password in the users table and let the user in if they match. For these two pages, I have considered error cases, such as when the user leaves any field blank, the username/password do not match, there is already a user using that name, etc. Every time an error is triggered, the apology.html (taken from the finance problem set) and the relevant error message will appear. 

After the user has registered and logged in, they will see two main pages: "Today" and "Set Habits". On the "Today" page, there can be two scenarios, the first of which is when the user has not set any habits (likely a newly registered user). In this case, "today1.html" will be rendered, informing the user that they need to go to the "Set Habits" page to set their habits. 

The "Set Habits" page has six input fields and six related selection bars. The user will type the content of the habit into the input field and the time phase (morning, afternoon, or evening) into the time phase selection bar. After that, the user can click the "Start 21-day challenge" to start the program. Once they click the button, all of the inputs will be stored in the habits table, and today's date will be stored in the challenge_start_date in the users table. 

After that, the user will be redirected to the today table, where today2.html will appear. On this page, the user will see the morning section, the afternoon section, and the evening section, each containing relevant habits. If there are no habits in a section, it will simply show "no habits in this section". Below that is a random quote selected from a list of quotes each time the page is loaded, to provide the user with a little more motivation and inspiration. And below that, at the bottom of the page, is a progress bar showing the progress over 21 days; it will also explicitly indicate which day the user is on out of 21 days, as well as the challenge start date. Next to each habit there is a "Mark Done" button, in which the user can click after completing the habit; before displaying, the page will check the "last_completed" column of that habit in the habits table, if the last completed date is not today it will show the "Mark Done" button ready to be clicked. When the user clicks the button (and confirms via a JavaScript pop-up), the last_complete column will be updated, and the button will be disabled, changed to "Done", and have a green color, indicating that the habit has been completed. The completed days of that habit will also be incremented by one. 

–Below are the functions yet to be implemented
After 21 days, on the Today page, a report of the performance for the past 21 days will be shown, indicating how many times each habit was completed during the 21-day period. The user will review these reports to identify which habits are solid and which ones need more work, and they can then start the 21-day cycle all over again. 

I have considered making this online, but SQLite is not scalable. I have explored libsql, but I find the asynchronous approach a bit challenging to program, so I think I will switch the database to MySQL after completing the CS50 SQL course to make it online accessible.